Add draft of remaining filtering section (#932)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: spatial/01-spatial_intro.Rmd

> ### Filtering with global QC thresholds

Author: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/pull/932/commits/ea1dd463255a6df2ffdbe2867c3050a308bda531

  ggplot2::aes(x = n100_sum_z, y = n10_sum_z, color = sum_log) +
  ggplot2::geom_point(alpha = 0.6) + 
  ggplot2::labs(
    x = "n_neighbors = 100", 
    y = "n_neighbors = 10", 
    title = "sum_z scores between neighorbhood sizes"
  ) + 
  ggplot2::geom_hline(yintercept = -3, color = "blue") +
  ggplot2::geom_vline(xintercept = -3, color = "blue") +
  ggplot2::scale_color_viridis_c(option = "magma") +
  ggplot2::theme(aspect.ratio = 1)
```
The top right quadrant shows spots that both neighborhood sizes retain, and the bottom left quadrant shows spots that both neighborhood sizes will filter out.
The top left shows spots that will only be filtered out for `n_neighbors = 100`, and the bottom right shows spots that will only be filtered out for `n_neighbors = 10`.
Note there's at least one pretty low `sum_log` value retained in both versions.

The point is, changing the cutoff or changing the neighborhood size will influence which spots are flagged for removal - plot your data!
If you have specific biological intuition about how much variation you expect in the tissue, you might want to use that to inform cutoffs and the neighborhood size, and it's ok to explore.

> Let's get back on track: let's do the same outlier detection for `detected` and `subsets_mito_percent`, and we'll proceed with the default cutoff of 3 with the default neighborhood size of 36.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Detected gene and mitochondrial outliers

Let's get back on track: let's do the same outlier detection for `detected` and `subsets_mito_percent`, and we'll proceed with the default cutoff of 3 with the default neighborhood size of 36.
```

  Since our values for mitochondrial percentage are very low with minimal variance, hangnail detection won't be relevant for us here

We'll detect local outliers based using `SpotSweeper::localOutliers()` which takes these arguments:

- `metric`: name of column in `colData` with QC stat of interest
- `direction`: are lower value or higher value outliers bad?
  - e.g. we'd say "lower" for detected (we don't want low detected values), and we'd say "higher" for mitochondrial percentage
- `n_neighbors`: number of neighbors for building the `kNN` graph; Default is 36
- `log`: whether to consider the `log1p` of the metric; Default is `FALSE`
  - The method assumes a normal distribution, so logging a metric may be needed to meet assumptions
  - logging "detected" and "sum" is often recommended because these distributions are unbounded and span orders of magnitude
  - logging "mitochondrial" is not often recommended because it's bounded `[0,100]` and logging percentages can distort the distribution
- `cutoff`: Threshold for identifying outliers; Default is 3, meaning 3 standard deviations from the mean (think z-scores)

>   - Can make this higher to be more stringent, lower to be less stringent, but don't go too low or you're not detecting outliers anymore

Reviewer: By the explanation you give (have not checked the docs specifically) I would expect this to go the opposite direction? 
```suggestion
  - Can make this higher to be less stringent (fewer outliers detected), lower to be more stringent, but don't go too high or you're not detecting outliers anymore
```

Author: Having spent the last 5 minutes debating with myself with what "stringent" actually means in this context... yes, I think this is right. But as a favor to future Stephanie, I'm going to not use the word stringent anymore.

  filtered_spe, 
  metric = "sum", 
  direction = "lower", 
  n_neighbors = 36, 
  log = TRUE,
  cutoff = 3
)
```

What do we have now?

```{r coldata-spotsweeper-sum, live = TRUE}
colData(filtered_spe)
```
New columns include:

- `sum_log`: The `log1p()` (i.e., `log(x+1)`) of the `sum` column
- `sum_outliers`: Logical whether or not the spot is an outlier
- `sum_z`: The _local_ z-score for `sum_log`, among spots in the local neighborhood.
  - 0: same as neighbors on average
  - high positive value: much higher `sum` than neighbors
  - low negative value: much lower `sum` than neighbors, which in this case would be the ones to filter
  
We can see some of this relationship - the spots flagged as outliers are those with a `sum_z` less than -3, the default cutoff for the lower direction:
  
```{r outliers-boxplot}
filtered_spe_coldata <- colData(filtered_spe) |>
  as.data.frame() 

# TODO: Does having this plot help explain or not?
# I chose jitter because we can see all the points and know right away most are not outliers
ggplot2::ggplot(filtered_spe_coldata) + 
  ggplot2::aes(x = sum_outliers, y = sum_z) + 
  ggplot2::geom_jitter(size = 0.5) + 

>   ggplot2::geom_hline(yintercept = -3, color = "red")

Author: > I don't know that I love this? I think it does show what you're trying to show but it's not my favorite. What about a ridge plot or density plot where you color each density plot by TRUE/FALSE?

I will explore here more, but just fyi I started with density plot but it does too much smoothing in a way that doesn't make the cutoff obvious

<img width="600" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2f9d3fdf-9ea3-45fd-bae0-95342e6b1b19" />

>   ggplot2::geom_hline(yintercept = -3, color = "red")

Author: (but I don't think we _need_ this given: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/pull/932/commits/b5fabf1847a3f05f57389cbad033aab2d8a48e22)

```{r spotsweeper-plotqc-sum, live = TRUE}
#| fig.width: 7

SpotSweeper::plotQCmetrics(
  filtered_spe, 
  metric = "sum_log", # how to color spots
  outliers = "sum_outliers", # which spots to highlight with an outline
  colors = c("blue", "yellow") # low -> high palette colors. TODO: right now this is for Ally, but we don't need to do this; can use ggplot2::scale_fill_distiller instead and turn off messages
) 
```
Here, we can see how spots are distributed across the slide and can clearly tell that see some outliers are more outlying than others.
Would we have caught these if we had filtered with global thresholds?

```{r spotsweeper-vs-global}
filtered_spe_coldata |>
  dplyr::filter(sum_outliers) |>
  # rename for clarity
  dplyr::select(
    global_sum = sum, 
    spotsweeper_sum_z = sum_z
  ) |>
  dplyr::arrange(global_sum)
```

It's likely we would have caught a lot of these, but not all, especially the flagged spots with more than 5000 UMIs (a typical single-cell threshold for library size which we are learning is not necessarily the right way to think about spatial data).

> **TODO: I don't know how I feel about including the next chunk - who has thoughts? Leaning heavily much towards removing it, but I wanted to include for now in case it sparks an idea during review!** 

Author: > I like this in general, but I feel like 5 and 1000 may be too extreme of variants? What do 10 and 100 look like?
<img width="749" height="327" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-26 at 2 28 39 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5ae3e8ae-7696-4923-b5dd-692941fd7d6b" />

> I would also plot sum_log here for consistency with the previous plot. I think just showing where the differences are is useful, but the varying color scales make it hard to interpret.

<img width="905" height="435" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-26 at 2 27 32 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e67e4864-07dd-4d6c-975b-5ed9fd536fc5" />

And a plot for the number folks among us:
<img width="520" height="455" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-26 at 2 31 44 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e307c7e3-e5e3-43ad-b6e0-779f35a1df0f" />

**TODO: probably add more intermediate exploration of each filter?**

```{r spotsweeper-detected, live = TRUE}
#| fig.width: 7

filtered_spe <- SpotSweeper::localOutliers(
  filtered_spe, 
  metric = "detected", 
  direction = "lower"
)
SpotSweeper::plotQCmetrics(
  filtered_spe, 
  metric = "detected_log",
  outliers = "detected_outliers", 
  colors = c("blue", "yellow")
) 
```

```{r spotsweeper-mito, live = TRUE}
#| fig.width: 7

filtered_spe <- SpotSweeper::localOutliers(
  filtered_spe, 
  metric = "subsets_mito_percent", 
  direction = "higher", # we want to remove HIGHER values 
  log = FALSE, # don't log, already bounded
  cutoff = 5 # make this one really strict since we already know mito % is low everywhere
)

SpotSweeper::plotQCmetrics(
  filtered_spe, 
  metric = "subsets_mito_percent", # not log!
  outliers = "subsets_mito_percent_outliers", 
  colors = c("blue", "yellow")
) 
```

How many of each kind of outlier?

```{r count-local-outliers}
c("sum_outliers", "detected_outliers", "subsets_mito_percent_outliers") |>
  purrr::set_names() |>
  purrr::map(\(outlier_column) {
    table(filtered_spe[[outlier_column]])

>   })

Author: > With only three categories, maybe a *gasp* venn diagram?

😂😂😂 I had this thought but wasn't ready to take that plunge yet.... 

But here's one how might look with `ggVennDiagram` which seems to be the fastest route to get there. The set names are really tricky to get legible, hence they are shortened to just the stat name.

<img width="471" height="403" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-26 at 3 24 15 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b4c4b618-67f2-449f-a81e-a1f116c2533d" />

```
# show my work, 
dat <- colData(filtered_spe) |>
  as.data.frame()

input_list <- list(
    sum = which(dat$sum_outliers),
    detected = which(dat$detected_outliers),
    mito = which(dat$subsets_mito_percent_outliers)
  )
ggVennDiagram::ggVennDiagram(
  input_list,
  label = "count", # by default shows count & percentage, but thats super busy i think and numbers are small anyways
  # set font sizes
  set_size = 4.5,
  label_size = 5
) +
# green is my favorite color 
ggplot2::scale_fill_distiller(palette = "Greens")
```

>   })

Reviewer 2: I like the venn diagram here actually and I think it nicely gets the point across rather than use an upset plot.

# specify defaults for sum to be explicit
filtered_spe <- SpotSweeper::localOutliers(
  filtered_spe, 
  metric = "sum", 
  direction = "lower", 
  n_neighbors = 36, 
  log = TRUE,
  cutoff = 3
)
```

What do we have now?

```{r coldata-spotsweeper-sum, live = TRUE}
colData(filtered_spe)
```
New columns include:

- `sum_log`: The `log1p()` (i.e., `log(x+1)`) of the `sum` column
- `sum_outliers`: Logical whether or not the spot is an outlier
- `sum_z`: The _local_ z-score for `sum_log`, among spots in the local neighborhood.
  - 0: same as neighbors on average
  - high positive value: much higher `sum` than neighbors
  - low negative value: much lower `sum` than neighbors, which in this case would be the ones to filter
  
Let's see some of this relationship - we'll plot `sum_log` (log of a globally-calculated stat) against `sum_z` (stat for _local_ outlier), with a guiding line for the cutoff.

```{r sum_log_z_plot}
filtered_spe_coldata <- colData(filtered_spe) |>
  as.data.frame()

ggplot2::ggplot(filtered_spe_coldata) + 
  ggplot2::aes(
    x = sum_log,
    y = sum_z,
    color = sum_outliers
  ) +
  ggplot2::geom_point(alpha = 0.5) + 
  # add guiding line at outlier cutoff

>   ggplot2::geom_hline(yintercept = -3, color = "blue")

Author: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/pull/932/commits/ea1dd463255a6df2ffdbe2867c3050a308bda531

Looking at the x-axis here, that means we would only have removed three spots.
But with local filtering, we are catching additional spots that deviate from their local neighborhood and filtering a few more out, but on the whole this dataset seems to be fairly good quality so it's not a ton.

Let's plot this next to the H&E:
We'll use a plotting function from `SpotSweeper`, `SpotSweeper::plotQCmetrics()`, which will allow us to both color by a statistic and highlight outlier points.
Well plot the `sum_log` side-by-side with `sum_z` to compare.

Tip!
When using this function, the point color is a "fill" aesthetic (which can be customized), and the point outline is a "color" aesthetic (the color of which is quite finicky to customize so we'll leave that alone, but we can customize its `linewidth` parameter).

```{r spotsweeper-plotqc-sum, live = TRUE}
#| fig.width: 10
#| message: FALSE

sum_log_plot <- SpotSweeper::plotQCmetrics(
  filtered_spe, 
  metric = "sum_log", # how to *fill* spots
  outliers = "sum_outliers", # which spots to *color* with an outline
  stroke = 0.75 # size of outline
) +
  # customize the palette for filling spots

>   ggplot2::scale_fill_distiller(palette = "Blues") +

Author: I did keep these two palettes different since I didn't really want different metrics to have the same palette. I played around with this though to try a different set of viridis palettes side by side, and I managed to fix the outline for outliers to be black so we can see this more clearly (I want to apply the black throughout, honestly). 

What do you think of something like this? Is this confusing, or clarifying? 
<img width="915" height="423" alt="Screenshot 2026-03-02 at 10 24 01 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/97da40d2-e7e2-4ed1-aef8-f70c8ce97785" />

(nb, this also illustrates that the order legend is whatever it's gonna be, even though code is all same order for both these two plots ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ )
